# Treesitter Semgrep Move on Aptos (ALPHA)
Semgrep integration and Move Tree-sitter grammar

## Project Structure

Most files within this repo are auto-generated by `tree-sitter`. The only files you need to care about:

- `grammar.js`: the main grammar rules for move programming language;
- `src/scanner.c`: the external scanner used in `grammar.js`. Currently, it is used to scan block (document) comments and line document comments. It’s unlikely you will need to update it or add new scanners;
- `batch-test.py`: a Python script for testing the grammar. It will recursively scan the given paths and test files ending with `.move` against the grammar.
Usage: `python3 batch-test.py <PATH> [ ... <PATH> ]`. 
**You should run `tree-sitter generate` each time you modify the grammar before testing.**
- `.github/workflows/test-on-repo.yaml`: GitHub Workflow configurations.

## Setting up the Environment

Before contributing to the grammar rules, install and configure `tree-sitter` . A good way to install it is going through tree-sitter's [Getting Started](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/creating-parsers#getting-started) section.

It is recommended to use a node version manager for Node.js runtimes.

By the time you have finished, you should have these installed and configured:

- Node.js (optimally installed by a version manager);
- A working C compiler (for macOS user, this is shipped by **Xcode Command Line Tools**);
- `tree-sitter` installed either through `cargo` or `npm`. Be sure that `tree-sitter` can be found within `$PATH`.
- (Optional) Rust compiler and Cargo.

Additionally, you may also want to install `Python` for batch testing the rules.

You need to execute `tree-sitter init-config` under the repo to initialize `tree-sitter` for the first time.

## Writing the Rules

Mostly likely, `grammar.js` is the only file requiring modifications. It is rare to update `src/scanner.c`.

Tp learn how to write tree-sitter grammar DSL, see:

- https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/creating-parsers#the-grammar-dsl
- https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/creating-parsers#writing-the-grammar

In addition, a few sources you may need:

1. https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter-rust: Rust’s tree-sitter grammars.
2. https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter-javascript: JavaScript’s tree-sitter grammars.
3. [third_party/move/move-compiler/src/parser/syntax.rs](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/third_party/move/move-compiler/src/parser/syntax.rs): Move’s top-down parser, the de-facto grammar reference.
    
    Be aware, the documents within `syntax.rs` (especially the doc comments before a parsing method) could be **incomplete** or **wrong**. You should always read the codes for reference.
    
    Also, when contributing to this repo, be sure to pull `aptos-core` periodically in case of new language features.
    

After you finish coding, run `tree-sitter generate` to check

1. whether `grammar.js` contains any syntax errors;
2. whether the rules contain any conflicts. Tree-sitter’s documents serve as a great literature for resolving conflicts.

## Testing the Grammar

To test the grammar on an individual file, run:

```bash
$ tree-sitter parse ${MOVE_FILE}
```

Some useful flags for debugging:

- `-d`: show parsing debug log;
- `-D`: produce the log.html file with debugging parsing graphs.

You would get a parsing tree in the standard output after execution. An error message may be present at the last line, and you can jump to the place based on the line and column number. **Line numbers and column numbers start from 0**.

Remember to test the rule on a larger scale using `batch-test.py`.

## Submitting the Code

You should run `tree-sitter generate` before committing. Remember to include updated generated code into your git commit.